The Social Contract - JJ Rousseau

Book I

"Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains." CH1

CH2 - The most basic society is the family.  The subjugation of liberty is voluntary until no longer necessary.  Man is born free and this society is a result of the nature of man.

CH3 - Denies the right of the strongest.  If the right to rule comes from strength, then that right can be over rulled when someone strong comes along.  Duty to obey is a necessity, not moral choice or obligation and is void when those rules have strength enough to fight for their liberty.

CH4 - Denies the right of the slave owner.

CH5 - The beginnings of defining 'the people'

CH6 - examines how man can be free while forming an association with others.  Man can only be free if each gives them self fully to the association equally.  No departure from full subjection and equality can be made lest some then hold more power over others than they hold over themselves.

"Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and , in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole." CH6

CH7 - The people through the contract become the sovereign.  The sovereign cannot bind itself to anything that infringes upon itself or its original act. The sovereign cannot have any interest contrary to that of its members.

Strangely: the subject needs no protection from the sovereign (it is always what it should be) but the subject is compelled to obey by the whole body.

"This means nothing less than he will be forced to be free" CH7

"Duty and interest therefore equally oblige the two contracting parties to give each other help: and the same two men should seek to combine, in their double capacity, all the advantages dependent upon that capacity" CH7

CH8 - by entering into the social contract, man looses his natural liberty and unlimited right to everything but gains civil liberty and proprietorship of all he possesses.

Distinguishes natural liberty (bounded only by his strength) vs civil liberty (limited by the general will); and possession (ownership by force or first) vs property (founded on positive title)

CH9 - Property rights only exist under a collective association.  By the sovereign rights to all common property (and will all men subjects of the sovereign) then personal ownership is strengthened against brute force and annexation.

3 conditions for the right of first occupier:
- the land must not be inhabited,
- man must only occupy the amount needed for subsistence
- ownership can only be asserted through labour, not mere claim.

Questions
=========

What is the relationship between the Sovereign, general will, State, Government, prince and magistrate?

Does the formation of the Sovereign require consensus? How does Rousseau balance his conflicting remarks?